OK.
Sean, are we ready to start?
I believe so.
So good morning everyone.
So I hope all of you are ready
for today's lecture. I will just
start with a recap of what we
covered last session very
quickly, and then
we'll start on new topics.
After this quick
review will wait for some time
for Q&A and continue with the new
topics. So let's start with the.
Uh. Like before, I mean just to
make sure that everyone has their
focus to the slides.
Please send me some feedback. I
mean emoji icons or I mean this
app gives you some options.
You can you can send some
feedback by this app too,
so just send me some.
Yes, I'm receiving some.
Cool.
So we have around 62 students
right now, but yes, I'm
receiving some feedback. Cool.
Awesome.
Ah, OK, let's start. I mean, we
started with the stars and we
said the people in
the old days wanted to travel
between Earth and those stars to
explore the universe so they
start some to propose some
problems and one of the most
basic problem is what's the
distance between us and the stars?
And they said that they started to
Measure the distance of Earth to
the Sun. Last session, we said
that let's pick the distance of the
Moon to the Sun.
And, what we did was that. I
mean what all the people in the old
days did was that they
brokedown the continuous
quantity which is the distance
into discrete units of Earth.
And then they start to count and
measure by the number of Earth.
So by just this illustrative
image, you could say that the
the distance of the Moon to
the Sun is about, I mean five
Earth. I mean by just some error
or roughly 5 Earth.
And so that was simple. But the
thing is, that's the most
important step in analyzing any
type of information. I mean
breaking down the continuous
quantity into discrete units.
So that was the birth of the
discrete systems. Computer
system is just a single member
of this huge I mean category.
And then we discuss what are
the other types of. I mean,
what are the other quantities
that are continuous or
discrete? We said that for
instance, electron is a
discrete quantity. Time is a
continuous quantity. So in
order to analyze time in the
computer system, we have to
break it down into discrete
units of, for instance, days,
hours or minutes.
And in particular for the image
we said that image is a
continuous quantity in the real
world, because it's a reflection
of light and material.
Uh, so you must say that this
is the first image from
I mean years ago and you
could say that how can we
process image? Or is there a
course called image processing?
How can we process image in the
computer system? This thing is same
as we did for the distance, we
have to break it into discrete
units and the discrete units in
images are called pixels, and then
process that.
And after that, after breaking
down this continuous quantity
into discrete units, we said
that the next step is to
represent that measurement, you have
to write it down. So in Roman
Empire, I mean about 8 centuries
before Christ they start to
introduce a symbol for nothing,
they just represent nothing.
For one unit, they invent one
symbol called I, and then for
the next unit. I mean more units.
They just repeat that symbol. So
for the two they put two I for
three, they put three I.
And then there was another
important step in analyzing
information, so you first
breakdown a continuous entity
to discrete units and then you
want to represent those units
by some symbols or numbers or
digits. The whole process is
called quantization.
Then we said that this is
called the Unary system where we
have only one symbol or base
one. And based on this system,
we said that if you want to
represent the most distance to
the Sun, the distance is about
12,000 Earth. So we need 12,000
positions or we need to repeat I
12,000 times. So it becomes
about four pages. And that's a
huge number of space just to
represent 1 number, 12,000.
Then we said that, is it
possible to improve the Unary
system? And the answer was yes.
So that was the evolution of the
numbering system within
history. Up until now, we
have 10 symbols and instead of
just one symbol, and as you can
see the at first, there were no
symbols for zero, so gradually
more symbols were added to represent
zero and more units.
And after 24 centuries we have
the decimal system we are using
right now in high school or in
the school from 0 to 9.
So then I introduce my
own numbering system to improve
the Unary system, and we saw
that based on the Hossein's system
we have four symbols 0123. But we
didn't have any symbol for 4,
so we have to come up with the
work around to represent 4 by
the existing symbols 0123.
And we said that we can do this
by introducing a new position to
the left or right. So then we
discuss how can we count base
on the Hossein system by
introducing position to the
left. And basically what we did
was that, we keep track
of what we done so far in the last
position and then introduce and
start counting on the first
position. For instance,
for the number 16, we said that
we do one time from zero to
three and then another time
zero to three, zero to three, zero to three and then zero.
So basically 16 is equal to the
sum of all these 3 + 0 and plus
number of positions minus one
because whenever we add a new
position we take one step.
So this is my own system by just
counting whenever we are done
with the symbols, we introduce
new positions and this is the
math formula we came up with.
And then we said that if you're
giving some numbers in in
numbering system,
what's the equal
value in the decimal system and
based on what I said, first, we
have to check whether that
number is a valid number and
then start converting to the
decimal system. For instance,
this number was not a valid
number because in Hossein's
system, whenever you introduce a
new position, you have to end
with the largest digit which is
3. So you cannot have such a
number 303. Uh, but this was a
valid number 33331, and in order
to see what's the equal value in
decimal system we have to just
sum all the digits plus number
of positions minus one, so this
is equal to 17, and more symbols.
And then for any numbering
system, we said that we can
calculate the minimum value,
which is just repeating the
zero, the lowest digit, in
all positions and the
maximum is just repeating
the largest digit in all
positions. So in Hossein's
system, if you're given N
positions, the maximum
number would be 4 * N - 1
because we have to add
all the threes plus the number of
position minus one.
So we did that and then we
saw that if you're giving 10
positions, the maximum number
in Hossein System is going
to be 39, which is a very
small number, so Hossein's
system is able to represent a
very small range of numbers.
And we said that if you're
given a number in decimal
system and we want to represent
it in a new number
system such as for Hossein's number
system. How many positions do
we need? And the solution is that
we just take that number, the
given number, as the maximum
number. And you already knew
that the maximum number is equal
to 4 * N - 1, so with just little
math, we keep the number of
positions to the right and
everything to the left. So the
number of positions in Hossein
system in order to represent the
number N, capital N, is equal to N
+ 1 / 4.
And then based on this, we
wanted to represent
the most distance
to the Sun, but this time with
Hossein's system and we saw that
it is a little bit better
than the Unary system because
in order to represent 1000,
we only need 3000 positions and
3000 position is just one page of paper, so
we can reduce 4 pages to one
page, and we said that is it
possible to improve Hossein's
system? I mean more, and we said
that the answer is yes.
Instead of just keeping track of
what we passed through the
symbols, we can keep track of
the rounds over the symbols. So
when, for instance we go
0123, we done one round over
all the digits. So instead of
just keeping the last digit, we
keep track of the number of
rounds. So we said that we can
have this, so when we step from
three to four, we say that this is one
round over all the digits and
then zero, so 1 0 becomes
4 in this new system.
And the difference is that in
this new system, if we introduce a
new position, that position
has a higher significance. As
you can see here, this one means
that one round over all the
digits, which is four digits.
But this one is in the first
position, meaning that just
one is just one step. So this 1 in
the higher significant position
has a significance of four or 4
to the power of 1.
So we did continue this way in
order to count up until 16 and
then we call this system the
quaternary system which has only
four symbols 0123.
And because it has four
symbols, we call it base-4 or
radix four symbols, and the
difference, the main
difference is that when we
introduce new position, the
positions have
significance, and because we have
four symbols, we do around
over 4 symbols. So the
significance are based on the
powers of four.
So the first position has the
significance for the power of 0,
which is 1. So it's just normal,
0 is equal to 0 to decimal
system. One same. Two same. Three
same. But when we are going to
four for the next step, you have to
introduce new position
with the significance of
four to the power of 1.
And then in order to come up with,
for instance, what's the equal
value in decimal system for 1
0? It means that one multiplied
by the significance of the
position. Plus 0 multiplied by
the significance of the
position for the zero, so it
becomes 4. For 2 0 in base-4
system, 2 multiplied by 4 to
the power of 1 because two is
in the position with the
significance of four to the
power 1, plus 0 * 4 to the power of 0.
So in total it becomes 8.
And then new positions, 4 to the
power of 2, four to the power of
three and, etc. So this is a more
efficient system. I will call
this base-4 or radix four
numbering system. And we
said that if you are giving
the same numbers,
we saw that these
numbers. How can we convert
these numbers in the Hossein
system? But if you are given
the same numbers, but this time
in the base-4 system. what's the equal
value in decimal. So for
instance, given this number,
first of all this is a valid
number because all the digits
are between 0123.
And in order to convert it to
the decimal system, we just have
to figure out the significance
of each position and then
multiply each digit to the
significance of the position,
and then sum altogether.
And then when we do this for
all the other numbers, we saw
that these are the
equal decimal numbers.
For these numbers in
base-4. And we compared this new
system, base-4 system, on the old
Hossein system we saw that
base-4 system is much
better because for some numbers
that are not valid in Hossein
system, we have a equal decimal
system in base-4, so this is
a valid number and we can
exploit or we can use this
availability for base-4, and
also another instance is that if
you are given 10 positions
since here in the last number,
so we have 10 digits of three.
This number is the maximum
number for Hossein system 39, with ten
position, but the maximum number
with 10 positions for the
base-4 is about 1,000,000
something. So you can see that
the base-4 system is a
much better
numbering system, because it
can represent a wider range
of numbers.
So let's just do another poll
to see whether you
remember all this stuff.
Please go to this URL. I put
some questions in the poll. I
put it the same link in the
chat. Uh.
So please click on this link.
And when you're ready, just send
me some feedback to let me know that you
can see the
question.
So this is the question, we
already knew that this number 10
digits of three is equal to
1,000,000 something in
decimal system. So basically
digit 3 10 times, so we just
want to know how we
ended up with the 1,000,000
something, that number.
So let's wait for others to
participate.
Again, we have 75 students right
now in the class.
But we are just receiving 32, 34
so let's wait for others to answer
this question. So the answer is
basically you have to just
multiply 3 by the significance
of each position based on the
powers of four and then sum
altogether. But the thing is, we
can do this based on the formula
we've learned in high
school. Based on the
geometric series.
So let me share my
camera and I can solve this
problem in the board.
Alright,
so let's solve this problem.
So basically we have 10 threes.
Ten
...
So this is the number. So as we said, we have
to calculate the significant
position from 4 to the power
of 0, 4 to the power of 1, 4 to the power of two,
4 to the power of 3. Up until 4 to the power
of 9, from zero to 9 becomes 10
positions and then we have to
multiply each digit with the
significance of that position,
and then sum together. So
if we do that.
So we have 3 * 4 to the power
of 0 + 3 * 4 to the power of
1 plus up until
3 * 4 to the power of nine.
So by math.
Say that we can extract three.
And then I would say that 4
the power of 0, 4 to the power of 1 plus up until 4
to the power of 9.
So this is a geometric series.
With the ratio 4, so just to
recall. This is a
recall from math.
So if you have is series Q to
the power of 0 plus Q to the power
of 1 plus Q to the power of two up
until Q to the power of N.
This series is called
Geometric series with the ratio
Q and the result is equal to Q
to the power of N + 1 - 1
/ Q - 1.
So based on this.
We can say that the.
You can keep the three and so the
inside of the parentheses is
equal to 4 to the power of 9 +
1 which becomes  4^(10) - 1 / 4 - 1.
So we can simply say
this is three.
We can just remove these and
then the result is 4 to the
power of 10 - 1.
Which is, let's see how
many of you actually
have the correct answer.
Yes, uh, most of you actually
have the correct answer.
So let's go back to the.
Yeah, sure, let me give you a
chance to see the board.
Yes.
So we can simply just put in the
number and then calculate the
significance of each position
and then multiply
Each digit to the significance
of that position.
And then we extract 3. This
is the geometric series with the
ratio 4. So from four to the power of 0
to the four to the power of
nine becomes
4^(10) - 1 / 4 - 1.
OK, let's continue.
Let's back to the slides.
Share my screen.
So that's why I did this. If you
calculate the number 4 to the
power of N - 1.
It becomes more 1,000,000
something, so let's do that.
So if you say that 4 to the
power of 10 - 1.
It's the same number as you can
see here.
1,048,575.
So.
Now, if you are given N
positions, what would be the
maximum number? The same
procedure, you can do the same
procedure, but this time it's
not just ten positions, you have
N position and this is the math
behind that. So three times the
significance of old position
from position 0 to the position
N - 1.
So from 0 ... N - 1 becomes N
position, and then 3 * 4 to the N
minus 1 / 4 - 1. So this is the
maximum number when you are
given N position for the base
four. As you can see, it's to
the power of four, but in Hossein
system, it's times 4, so you can
see the improvement.
And the same if you are given
the N as 10, so we end
up with the same number.
How about the other way around?
If you are given a number in
decimal system and we are asked
how many position we need in
order to represent that number
in base-4 system?
Again, we assume that number is
the maximum number, so N the
maximum number is equal to 4 to
the power of N - 1. So just
simple math. Bring one to
the right side, becomes plus
one and then we apply log on
both sides so at the end we
have and the number of
position is equal to log N
+ 1 to the base of four.
So now let's back to the
original question, which was
the what's the most distance
to the Sun. But this time in
the base-4 system.
So let's go back to
the poll and see.
I will go to
the next question.
So let's now see what's the
distance of Moon to the Oracle
Today, the Sun. If you are given
the distance, the actual
distance by an Oracle.
So how many pages we need?
Less than one page, one
page, two or three pages?
So basically. Let's
see the answer.
Oh, we are still waiting for
others. So let's wait for others
and see. Uh, what is the answer?
So again, we have 77 is
still in the class, so I
need more votes, you know?
I choose the answer is just
the distance, we already knew
that it's about 12,000 units of
Earth, so we just need to know
how can we represent 12,000 in a
base-4 system, how many position
we need. So we assume 12,000 as
the maximum number and based on
our formula it is log 12,000 +
1. Based on the base of
four, so we have to apply
log 4 on 12,000 + 1.
But the only issue here is that
usually the calculators have log
base on 10.
So how can
we apply a log on a base of
four? If you are given a
normal calculator?
So that's the issue.
So let's see the answer so.
Ah, yes, actually. Travis
actually gave a very good
answer to that, so I'll show you
how we can apply log 4 when
the calculator has log N.
So let's let's move
on to the answer.
OK, 50% so let's see
what's the answer.
The answer is based on our
formula. We already knew that. I
mean the distance of Moon to the
Earth is about 150 million
kilometers and the diameter of
the Earth is about 13,000. So we
need to have 1000. So you just
need to represent 12,000.
So we assume that the maximum
number is 12,000 and based on
the base-4, the number of
position is equal to log
N + 1. N is 12,000 + 1.
But based on the base of four,
so the calculators has log
based on the 10. So based on
math we know that log a.
On a base of b is equal to log a
on a base of 10 divided by log
b on the base of 10.
So here we assume that a is
equal to 12,000 + 1 and b is
equal to four. So we can simply
calculate the log 12001 on the
base of 10 divided by log 4 on a
base of 10.
And this is equal to
4 / 0.6 and it's
about 6.79. Which is equal to
around seven position. So
when we are representing the
distance 12,000 we need about
seven positions, so less
than a page is the correct
answer. Just seven position we
need. And and what's the
actual number? So we know that
we need seven position, and when
we wanted to convert 12,000
decimal system to the base-4,
it becomes equal to 2323200.
But up to now we only know how
many positions we can have, but
we don't know how we can convert the
decimal number to this system to
other systems such as base-4
today. Today, our task is how can
we convert from decimal system
to the other number systems?
Uh, so I can wait for some
questions. If you have any.
You can put your question on the
chat or raise your hand.
And Sean will let me know and I
can answer your questions.
So there's no questions.
So let's continue with
The topics for today.
So we start today's topic by the
common numbering system. So we
studied base-4 system.
So let me just make sure that.
Yes, you can see that.
Ah, you cannot. You can say that
we can change the number of
symbols to less
number of symbols or
larger number of symbols.
For instance, instead of just
having four symbol, we could
have two or three symbols.
Or in other systems we had only
one symbol, or we can have I
mean 6, 7, 8 or more than that. For
number of symbols. So in
decimal system, we have 10
symbols. Uh, you can do that,
and the same algorithm
applies for any base, but
there's some numbering system
that are very common and used in
the computer systems, and we're
gonna just give an overview of them.
Uh, we call them common
numbering system, the base,
...
The first one is the base-2 or
radix 2, because it has only two
symbols, zero and one.
And this is called binary
system. That's a name for that.
So in Binary system or base-2
system we have only two symbols,
zero and one. And.
If you are given
a series of digits.
And we are, we assume that this
is in a binary system. First we
have to check that the digits
are valid. So we see that all
the digits are zero or one, so
we don't have any other digits
such as two or three or
something, because we are in a
binary system. And then we have
to measure the
significance of each position.
So from the first position to
the last position, we just
calculate the significance of
the position. Because we are in
the base-2 system, we have only
two digits. We do rounds over 2
digits, so the significance or
based on the powers of two.
So we start from 2 to the
power of 0 to the power of 1
up until to the power of
7, so eight positions, and then
we multiply each digit to the
significance of each position
and then we just sum together,
so this number,
10101101, is equal to 173
in decimal system.
The next sample is this. We have
this number and you want to
calculate what's the actual
value in the decimal system. So
again, we put the significance
of each positionn and
then we do the multiplication.
But the thing is before that we have
to check the digits are valid.
As you can see here we have a
digit such as two and three
which are not valid digits in
Binary system, so we cannot
convert it to the decimal
system account. We can say
that this is not a valid
number in binary
system.
So now because Binary system is
very important in computer
system, we will see it later. Let's
count in a binary system
if you are given only four
positions, so, I just
wanted to share my
camera again.
And let's count
on binary system.
When I was a student I tried to
repeat this process again and
again in order to just memorize
it so whenever I see a series of
binary digits. I can simply say
what's the equal value in
the decimal system so I suggest
you to do this, or repeat. This
again and again in order to just
master the digits up until at
least the last digit when we
are given four positions.
So.
As you can see here we are
given four positions.
So the significance of the
positions are based on powers
of two, so 2 to the power of
0, two to the power of 1, two
to the power of two and two
to the power of 3.
And then you start counting.
So the first number is 0 and if
we include zero in other
positions, it doesn't have any
impact because 0 multiplied by
any number is equal to 0. So
this number is equal to 0.
So we just put here
the decimal value.
So it's equal to 0.
The next step is 0 + 1
becomes one, so in all other
positions, 0.
Next is this number plus one. So
one unit further. So this plus
one becomes one.
So if I plus this with another
one, it becomes 2.
But two is not a valid number in
a binary system, so in order to
make it valid we have to
break it down into
Base two, 0s and 1s.
So we just divide 2
By two, it becomes one and
the remainder is equal to
0. So we put this remainder
on a result and then we
consider this as the carry.
As we did for the decimal system
in high school, so then this carry
goes to the next symbol so that
1 + 0 becomes one.
And so the other
positions are zero.
So now we have two. The next is
three, so 2 + 1. So we have to
sum this with just one.
So if you do this sum,
0 + 1 = 1, 1 + 0 = 1, 0 + 0 = 0 plus zero is 0,
so this is three.
So.
The next step is a four.
So, 4 is 3 + 1.
1 + 1 becomes 2, Two is
zero with a carry.
1 + 1 becomes 2 plus 0 becomes two
Two is zero with a carry.
And now 1 + 0 becomes
1, 0 + 0 = 0. So this is 4.
So if you do this
summation, I mean just
each number by one
incremented by one, you
end with this series, so
the next is
0101 (1101 is a mistake), the
next is
0110 (1110 is a mistake), so
0 1 2 3 4
Am I right? Oh sorry,
this should be all
0.
Sorry. 5,
6 plus
one. So
0111, so this is seven.
Now we can see that.
And then it is 7 + 1, so let's.
7 + 1. So
1 + 1 becomes 2. Two is one with a
carry. 1 + 1 = 2 plus 0 is 2, so 0
with a carry of 1. 1 + 1 = 2 + 0
becomes 2, Two is
zero with a carry. 1 + 0 + 0 becomes one,
so this is 8.
1000 becomes 8.
This way you can count up until
15. So the last number, if
you do counting again, the
last number would be.
So as we saw before the last,
the maximum number we are giving
a four position is the largest
digit in all positions, so we
have four positions. The largest
digit in Binary system is 1, so
you repeat one in all the
positions. This is 15.
So if we apply the same
formulation given, we are in the
base TWO (four is a mistake), so the number of
position is 4, so 2 to the Power
4 - 1.
Equal to 215 so the same
I mean formulation can be
applied here too in order to
find the maximum number in a
binary system when
we have four positions.
So let me go back to the slides.
OK.
OK.
So let's move on to the next
numbering system. So we already
covered the base-4, so we
have base-2, base-4 and now
we have base-8 where we have
only 8 digits from zero up
until seven. Again. As you can
see here, the largest digit is
number of the base minus one. So
8 - 1 becomes 7, so that's the
largest digit. So in order to
have maximum number we have to
repeat this data.
So the same rule
applies. So imagine you are
given this number this time
in base-8. First of all, this
is a valid octary number
because all the digits are
between zero and seven.
And in order to see what's the
actual value in decimal system,
we just have to calculate the
significance of the positions.
Because we are in the base
8, we do rounds over 8
digits. So the significance are
based on the powers of eight.
So from 8 to the power of 0, 8 to
the power of 1 up until 8 to the
power of 7. And then we do
multiplication with each digit
to the significance of the
position and then sum.
So this is the actual value,6,390,873 (NOTE: 57,508,953 IS A MISTAKE!)
, which is the number 30302131 in base-8.
As another example, if you are
given this number in base-8,
again you have to 1st figure out
if the numbers is a valid number. As
you can see here,
I have a digit A and a digit 8
which are not valid
digits in base-8.
Again, for this I put im
a kind of red color here
because although we are in
base-8, the valid
digits are 0, 1 up until 7,
so be careful about this when
you are doing calculation.
I encountered a lot of
mistakes by students in the
final exam. So when you are
given for instance in base-2,
the last digit is one. In base-4, the
last digit is 3 and in base
eight the last digit is 7. So be
careful about that.
And the same binary digits we
did calculation when we are in
the base-2, we wanna see if
we are given the same number in
the base-8. What would be
the number? So this is the
number. I mean. Again, multiply
each digit to the significance
of the position and sum
together. You can see that the
same number in base-8 is
equal to about 2 million
something, but in base
two, it was 173.
And now you can see the powers
of this eight with the same
number in the same positions. I
mean eight positions.
You can represent a large range of numbers.
A wider, very
wider, range of numbers in
base-8, and this is clear
because the significance are
based on the powers of eight
instead of powers of two.
And.
You at home you can
count in octal, so you
count 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and then when
you go to the 8th you have to plus
7 by 8. So let's, I can do that
for you just as a sample, let's
share my screen again.
So this time is significance of
the positions are based on the
powers of eight.
So.
The base-2 becomes base-8,
so 8 to the power of 0, 8 to
the power of 1, eight to the power of 2
and eight to the power of 3.
First number is 0, 1 up until
7 are the same as
decimal. 6, 7, but here
all these can be filled up
with zero. So all these
areas are zero.
But here when you are moving
from 7 to 8,
you simply have to
plus this with one.
When you plus seven with one, it
becomes 8. 8 you cannot represent
it in base-8, so you have to
divide 8 by 8, so it's equal
to 1 and the remainder is
zero, so you put the remainder
here. And then put the quotient
as they carry to the next
system. So it goes here as the
carry, and then 1 0 becomes one,
no carrying, so 0. So eight
becomes 10 in base-8, the
next number is going to be 9. 9 is 8
+ 1. So if you plus this number
with 1 + 0 = 1, so it becomes one.
No carry so 1100,
this is 9
in base-8.
So simply you have to increment
each number by one, but remember
if it is more than 7, you have to
divide it by 8, keep the
remainder and then put the
quotient to the carry.
The same calculation we
do in decimal systems.
So let's go back to the slides.
So.
This is base-8 and the next
is base-10 and we already are
familiar with the decimal
system. We have 10 digits from
zero, again, 10 - 1 becomes 9,
so the largest digit is 9.
And this is the system
that evolved within the
history. In any other
cultures we have just, I mean
the common numbering system
is decimal, so from the
Western digits, Eastern
digits, Roman empires, which
is using Greek, Bengali,
Malaysia. These numerals are
the same. I mean actual value
but different symbols.
Again, if you're given this
number in decimal system, we
have to multiply first
significance of the position
we are in the base-10, so it's
based on the powers of 10 and
then we multiply each digit by
the significance of the
position and then sum
altogether. And be careful
because we are in the base-10
so the powers of 10 is the
significance and then sum
altogether.
The interesting
thing is that when you do this,
you end up with the same
30,000,000 something you know,
30,302,131 is equal to 30,000,000
something in decimal. So when
you do this calculation, you end
up with the same series of
numbers. So in decimal system,
we did before all of the
converting the numbers in
other systems to decimal
system. So when you
converting the decimal to
decimal you end up with the
same number.
The same digits of Binary. I
mean they just 0 1, but we did
for the base-2 base-8 in
the base-10. You don't need any
calculation because you will end
up with the same series of digit
10,000,000 something. So it's
not just doing the calculation,
you can just say that this is
equal to decimal number 10,000,000
something in decimal system.
But again, when you compare
the same number 10101101 in
base-2 base-8 and base-10,
you can see that.
in base-8. You can, uh, have a
higher value for the same digit.
This is equal to 173. In
base-2 it's about 2 million in
base-8, but the same number
is is equal to 10,000,000.
Something in base-10.
And let's do another sample if
you are given this number again,
you have to check first if the
validity of the digits here,
because we have a A is not a
symbol in base-10, so this is
not a valid number.
And I believe that you can count
on decimal system from one to 15.
So I don't explain this anymore.
You already knew this from
primary school I guess.
And the next is a base 16
or hexadecimal ,hexadecimal
number system is as it at the
name actually says it has 16
digits. From zero one two up until
9 and then the next digit is
a next digit is BCDEF.
So this is the.
Uh, not make sense. I mean, 16
digits again in the source from
zero, but the largest digit here
is. 15  or F and you
can see the value is 16 - 1,
which is 15. So in this system
when they represent 15 they put
F as the symbol.
14 is E ,13 is D and
12 is C, 11 is B and
10 is A.
So let's practice. If you are
given this number 3 A 30809131
because  We are in the base
16, so the significance are
based on the powers of 16. So we
first calculate the significance
and then we multiply each digit
to the significance of the
position and then we all sum
together. You might wonder how
can we multiply a by 16 to the
power of five, as I said.
A is 1.
Step after 9 so it becomes 10,
so the actual value of a is 10.
So you can convert A to 10 and
then multiply 10 by 16 to the
power of 5.
And this is the number 8 million
815 million something.
In decimal system.
Again, if you are, if you see B,B
means next step after a which is
2 step after 9 which is 11.
C is 12. An up until F which
is equal to 15.
So the same binary digit or
binary number in base 16 is
equal to 269 million.
So again, in order to compare
from the same number in base-2
is 173 in base, eight is 2
million something base-10 is
10,000,000. But in base 16 at
the same number is equal to 269
million. So it shows you
the how we if we increase
the base or the number
digits. We can represent
a wider range of numbers.
And in this at home,
try to count from in
base 16 when you are
given 4 digits and.
And just practice this and
you'll see that you'll see that
when you are given just four
position, you will end up with a
maximum number. 416 to the
power of 4 - 1, which is a
huge number.
And the next is, uh, is the most
recent. I mean, numbering system
is base 64.
It has 64 symbols.
And pay attention. It is start
with a. So start with capital
letters in English ABC.
And then after the capital Z,
It start with the small cases of
letters in ABC, and then
zero one up until nine and the last
two digits are plus an forward
slash. So forward slash is the
largest digit in base 64.
And the lowest digit is A, so
this numbering system doesn't
start with zero. It is start
with A. And zero.
Has him a higher value in
decimal system, so be careful
about this numbering system.
So let's practice.
Anna, one thing is that this is
a nammack system used in emails
when they code texture in
formation. Uh, in, I mean,
if that's the standard for
exchanging email and today's
I mean Mail servers when
they are decoding the
textual information.
And this is the.
Actual value of each digit in
base 64. So, as I said, A is
equal to 0, P is 1 up until here
is small a is equal to #26.
Anna get interesting thing is
here O in base 64 is equal to
52, so be careful about that.
And the largest digit is forward
slash, which is equal to 63.
So let's practice.
I see what's the equal number in
decimal system for this number
in base 64.
So the same we first have to
figure out the significance of
the positions because we are in
the base 64, the powers are
based on 64.
And then we multiply each digit
by the powers of 64. So when we
do this, we have to figure out
what the value of plus what's
the value of Capital H. What's
the value of 1? So in base 64,
remember one is not doesn't have
the value of one. You have to
figure out what's the actual
value of 1 in base 64 and etc.
So when we look up in the table,
you see that a is equal to zero
capital, H is equal to 7.
Small a is equal to 26. Small,
b is equal to 29.
One is equal to 50, three and
three is equal to 55 And etc. So
based on this table, look up.
You know the actual value of
each digit in base 64.
And then you do the
multiplication so 62 times by 64
to power of 0 etc.
And then you sum altogether.
So this is this number in base
64 is equal to this huge number
in decimal system.
Actually, I'm not sure I can
read this huge number, but
that's the big number.
And.
In to wrap up all these systems
that when they introduce a new
position, they introduced new
position with the significance
and that significance are based
on the powers of R.
It would be 2, four or any
number 3,5,6, 16, 64 or 20.
It is called Radix -R numbering
system, so all these numbering
system that we discussed are
members of this category R
radix -R numbering system.
And pay attention to that. That
Hussein's numbering system,
which we introduced last session
or in the early decision.
Becaused this new position
doesn't have any significance.
The Hussein's system is not
considered as the radix-R
number system. So radix-R
numbering system makes
some are based on this
significance position based on
the powers of R.
And this is the general
formulation in order to convert
any number n.
In a base R.
To the equal number in base-10.
So you simply multiply each
digit the i to the
significance of that position
based on the powers of R. So
di I * R to the power of I an
use some altogether. But one
thing you have to be careful is
that. If you start from zero to
N - 1, so in total becomes n
positions. And. Before doing
this, you have to be careful
about this. Each digit must be
between 0 and R - 1.
So again in exam, instead of
just starting doing the
calculation, first check the
digits and then do the
calculation in order to save
time.
And as we did before in any
system, the any radix-R
system, the minimum value is
zero. You just Simply put zero
in all positions. The only
exception was base 64, the
lowest digit was a.
The maximum number is as we
calculated for base, 4 it was
based at this time. r is you
can replace four with RR to the
power of N - 1.
And the unit of Increment
is 1. So you increment the
numbers 1 by 1.
And, Uh, I I put in some
question in this regarding
the poll. So please go back
to the poll.
And let's see.
Let me run the question.
Is that yes? Yes yes.
Oh cool, so let's do a
little bit practice.
All what's the next 2 numbers
of 1111 in Radix 2?
So we have 4 one.
We want to know what's
next number and what's
the next number after
that to next numbers.
So because we are in Radix 2,
the first I mean option is not
correct because we have digits
more than one so the first
digits. The first number is
1112, but this is not a valid
number in Radix 2.
Also this one. So the first
choice is not correct.
The last choice also is not
correct because it has the
digits two, so these are not
a valid number radix too, so
the only options are the
second and third option.
So.
When we do this calculation, so
let's uh, share my camera.
And let's see what's the answer.
So 1111 you wanna do the
next number so we have to
plus this why?
Digit 1.
So 1 + 1 becomes 2, Two is not a
valid digit, so we have to
divide it by two because we are
in the base, two is equal to 1
and the remainder is 0.
So we put the remainder here and
then the quotient goes as they
carry to the next position.
And then one plus one 2 + 0
becomes two again, 2 cannot be
represented here. You have to
break it into based on the base
two, so divided by two becomes
one remainder is 0, so again
remainder and Carrie goes here.
Again, 1 + 1 two plus 0= 2,2 is
equal to zero with a carry.
1 + 1 two plus
0=2 So 2 is zero with a carry.
This is the last carry 1 + 0
+ 0 becomes one so.
It becomes a 5 digit
number 10000 and then
the next number is.
Because we are looking for the two
digits, the next two digits. So we
have to plus this number.
With one so now, if we
do this it becomes 01100000101.
So these are the last two
digits. This last two numbers.
So the correct answer is.
Uh, the second one, so
let's see the answer.
Yes, most of you actually
could answer the right
question. So next, let's
go to the next question.
Be careful we are in the radix
3, so in Radix 3.
Two is a valid digit.
So this time we have.
Let's back to the question.
We have 1111, but this number
is in the base 3.
So the next number is +1.
So 1 1 becomes 2, but we can use
the digit 2 because we are in
Radix 3. So we put two here.
101101101 so this is the
next number. And then next
number after this again we
have to increment it by 1 so
it becomes.
2 + 1 becomes 3. Now it's not
a valid number, so we have to 3
/ 3 because we are in the Radix,
three is equal to 1 and the
remainder is 0. So we put the
remainder here and then we put
the Carry here.
1 + 1 two plus zero =two.
And then 10 no carry to the
next position one and one so
1120. So it goes through
21112 and then 1120.
So let's see the answer.
Yes, so I mean hopefully I mean
a lot. Fortunately, all of you
actually could. Get this, uh?
So let's move on to the.
Uh. This question.
So what's the next two number
this time in Radix 64?
So let me share first my.
Always the.
Let me share my screen first.
And let's go back to the 64
table look up table.
This is the table.
Look up for base 64.
And the digits is this.
A Plus Capital Z forward slash.
So let me write it down here.
They plus Capital Z.
Forward slash, so we wanted to
increment this by 1.
You want to increment this by 1.
And we already knew that.
Forward slash has their value
63. Z has the value was
the value of Capital C 25.
And after c is small,  /
is has the value of 63.
And,uh.plus is the value 62.
And a small is is the
significance of 26.
So let's see the.
What are you doing? Oh cool.
So let me share my camera
and in the board we can see
what's the number.
So.
That was the number.
a + Z forward slash, so we
have to increment it by 1, so
forward slash plus one
forward slash is the largest
digit in base 64, plus it has
a value of 63 + 1 becomes 64.
Because we cannot represent 64
in the base 64, you have to
divide it by 64, which becomes
one and the remainder is 0.
So we put it 0 here and Carry
goes to the next.
z has the power has the value
25. Plus one becomes 26 plus
zero 26 so 26 we have to see
what's the digit in the 26
digit In 26 is the small a.
Because when we are done with
the capital letters, we start
with a small letters, so Z is
the last capital letter a, the
Next One is this small. So if
you look at the table you see
that 26 is equal to A.
And then there is no carry to
the next step, so plus.
Plus digits. Plus zero becomes
plus and then a + 0 becomes a.
So this is the next number.
a + a = zero.
And then if we do another
summation with.
One step so it becomes 0
+ 1 becomes 1,a plus zero, a
+ + 0 + a + 0
* a. So a + aB.
So the first actually option is
the right one.
So I can see there are
some questions are.
Oh yes, yes, actually
Brandon actually.
You're absolutely right.
Actually, I did a mistake here.
Uh. As you can see
in the base in a base 64 zero.
The symbol for zero is a.
So we have to replace a 0 here.
with A?
So then a plus one
becomes one. So
because in base 64, A
is the 0.
And. Also, these are.
Is in base because we are in the
base 64. We have to replace
zeros with a.
So a A A A 1 means 0001.
A true thank you, Brandon.
So the first option actually
in the poll was not right.
Actually there were no correct
answer, so I have to fix this
poll so it is a + aA.
Capital A because there is no
zero in base 64 with a value of
0. And then this is the
next number. Cool, thank
you, Brandon.
So let's back to the.
Slides.
Well, one thing is that, uh, so
the next topic is this.
So we're done with the radix
systems, but in the radix system
we didn't have any fraction.
Let's back that. All. I mean,
uh, first problem we wanted to
measure the most distance to the
Sun. But we said that the exact
distance is not five Earth, but
it was about four and a half.
So we need some fraction, so we
need to improve our numbering
system to have a  fraction
parts. In decimal system we have
4.5, four and a half. But how
can we have fraction in other
numbering system? So this is the
new topic fraction. So imagine
you're in based four and we want
to have fractions as the names
actually says, we want to
breakdown a unit into subunits.
So if you are in a base-4 and
we have one Earth.
We break it into into four
sections because we are in base
4 system. So when you do the
breakdown into four section, it
becoms. Each section has the
value 1 / 4.
So or in math you know that 1 /
4 is equal to 4 to the power of
minus one. And then we represent
4 to the power of minus one. By
this we just put a fraction
point and then one.
It means that we did one
subunit of the value four
to the power of minus one.
So we only use one. I mean uh
section over 4 sections.
And then two sections, it
becomes two multiplied by 1 /
4, SO 2 * 4 to the power of
minus one. And then 3.
And then up until all sections,
so four subsection, each one as
the value 1 / 4 is equal to 1.
So again, let's back.
Divided by 4 because we are in
base-4, each subsection is
half the value 4 to the power of
minus one. 2 times 3 times and four
times. So when we are in the 4 *
1 / 4 is equal to 1 unit.
So then we can represent the
distance of Moon to Sun a little
bit more precise. So we could
say that the distance is.
123410 is equal to four in base
4 system and then two subsection
of each one has the value 1
/ 4 SO 2 here 2.
1 / 4 or 4 to the
power of minus one.
If we need more precision.
We can split that, I mean a
subunit into more sub sub units
or that 1 / 4 divided by another
four subsections. So we can
simply do this so this time it
becomes 1 / 4 / 4 which is equal
to 1 / 16(1/8 is a mistake) which is equal to 4
to the power of minus 2.
So if you start with the
smallest portion, now we have.
One section over 8 subsections,
so it becomes 01 or this is
equal to the significance of
four to the power of minus 2.
Two sub sub section is equal to
2 * 4 to the power of minus 2.
3. 4 four means just one
subsection out of four sections
subsections. So it becomes this.
So now we can represent the
distance a little bit more
precise. You could say that the
distance is 4, two, 1 / 5 and
one 1 / 16(1/8 is a mistake), two one or four and
one 1 / 16(1/8 is a mistake).
So if we need more precision, we
have to break it more, so we
have to introduce more position
to the right. But as you can
see, when we introduce position
to the right of the fraction
point. The significance actually
decreases by the powers of
negative powers of four.
So imagine we have this here.
You have integral part an
fraction part. So in the
integral part we do the same as
we did before. So based on the
powers of four positive powers
of four in the fraction part we
do based on the powers of 4
but negative or decreasing
powers. So.
As you can see here, for the
power of minus 1 minus 2, up until
minus five and in the integral
part we have 4 to the positive
powers, 101 up until 7.
The same we just multiply each
digit with the significance of
the position, and then some
altogether. So in the right
position you can see that 2 * 4
to the power of minus one, 2 /
4. 1 * 4 to the power
of minus three is equal to 1
/, 64 and etc. And then we
sum each part together each
part individually. So in this
integral part, if we do some,
some number is 17,000,
something an in the fraction
part. If you do something
decompose this number.
And this is the way we actually
introduced fraction part in
other numbering system we did
for the base-4. The same is
for base-2 base-10, base
eight and etc.
And this is the general
formulation, so if you're giving
a number n capital N in base R,
and we want to convert it to the
base-10. Based on the fraction
point to the left side of the
fraction part is the same as
before. I mean, just multiply
it powers of r positive
powers from zero 2 N minus one
to the right side. Multiply
each digit, but the power of R
but negative powers of r or
decreasing powers and this time.
Be careful if it starts from
minus one to minus N, so we are
giving M fraction positions an
N integral positions.
And this is the way we
convert any fractional number
in any other base radix
numbers. For instance,
radix-r 2, decimal numbers.
And one thing is that the
minimum is still 0 accept base
64 so the 0.0 is the minimum
number. The maximum number is a
little bit different because not
only you have integral part, but
also you have to have you have
fraction part. So you already
know that the integral power
with n position, the maximum
number is R to the power of N -
1. But the fraction part
the fraction. What's the
maximum fraction part?
If you have the largest digit in
the right part of the fraction
point. So I give this as a
lecture assignment. I mean this
week and you can. I mean,
calculate this and prove what's
the maximum fraction part.
And. The unit, the unit of the
Increment. Because we have
fraction is not only one unit,
it is based on the most precise
actually unit which is having
one in the last position in the
fraction part. So it is 0000 up
until one. So the unit of
Increment is 1 * R to the power
of minus one M.
So because we have fractions.
So if you wanted to
practice on ratings 2.
This is the lowest number, the
smallest number in radix 2
hit three position for fractions
an four position for integration
integral part. So for the zero
and the next step you have to
increment this by a unit of
increment infractions, so the
next is this which is equal to
zero point 125.
And then the next is this 1 *
2 to the power of minus two
plus all the zeros.
So you can see that as from zero
it goes to zero point 125 and
then it goes to 0.25 etc.
And when you are done with the
old available numbers in the
fraction part, you end up with
one. So from zero to one you
can have these numbers this
fractional numbers. So these are
the fractional normal in base-2.
And, uh.
We can continue next session,
but one thing I want you to.
The study at home is that I
put these slides in the
blackboard and Please Review
these radix two and the
next samples in order to be
ready for the next lecture.
And we're done for today and now
I'm ready for your questions.
Sean, is there any
questions, just ask.
How do we submit the
lecture assignment?
Uh, the lectures assignments are
like lab assignments. I create
an assignment in the lectures
portion of the blackboard and
there's a due date for that.
It's very similar to lab
assignments, so but it is in the
lecture part of the blackboard,
so if you click on the lecture
and then go to the Week 01, then
you can see the assignment
there. I haven't posted right
now, but I will do it. I mean,
when I'm done.
Probably I will post it on
Wednesday. When I'm done with
the numbering system because
the lecture assignments
covering all the numbering
system.
Next, yeah, where can I
find the lecture slides?
Again, the lecture slides are
all in the lecture part, so let
me let me go to the blackboard.
Let me share it for you. So if
you go to the lecture side here.
You can see the welcome and then
here is the older material about
the week number one, so if you
can do this. Oh
you can see, uh, sorry you have
to go to the second week. OK, I
enable the second week and if
you go to the second week you'll
see lecture assignment there.
So it is not any enabled right
now it is hidden from you, but I
will enable it. I mean I mean in
two days. So then if you go
there you can see the assignment
and the deadline for that.
He was asking him about
the slides.
So let's go to the slides, OK?
I'm like he just I don't
think it's visible for them
on a blackboard.
Uh, this slide.
I think.
Uh, which? What is the thing
that can see the power point?
They can see the videos I think,
but not just the PowerPoint.
Oh the PowerPoint. I think. The
power points are on PDF. Let me
go back to the.
To the blackboard.
Uh, if you go here, for
instance, this is for previous
next week, so the power points.
This is the video. If you look
at the attached file.
Here is a PDF file, so if you
click the I said presentation
slides are available in attached
PDF file. So here is the PDF.
All these lines are in PDF, let
me. It's it's loading.
Yes. All the presentation slides
are in PDF file.
For the first session and the
second session, I also for
today's session I will post it
as the PDF file, but today's
session goes to the second week.
So I enabled this second
week and then I put all
this and slides here.
So next question.
There was one it said. Can
you explain the answer of
the last quiz?
Uh, the last in the poll.
oh for the for the.
Let me bring the poll.
For this one, yes.
I think that's what he meant.
OK, uh, for this one?
Uh, let me calculation
again. Let me share my.
To share my screen first.
My camera.
So. This is the number we wanted
to see what the next number, and
then once the next number so.
If you wanted to increment this
number, we have two plus by 1.
But one in We are in the base-4.
Base 64 so in base 64.
0.
Is the digit for 0 is a in
64. So in order to represent 1,
one is this.
AAA and O and 1
oh sorry, that's not
correct because one.
In 64 is let's see, it's
capital B. So. This is the.
Number equal to 0001.
OK, so then we have to sum it.
So.
The Slash Plus B is means that
63 + 1 becomes 64.
But we are not allowed to
represent 64, so we have
to divide it based on the base
or radix of. I mean this number
system so it's equal to 1.
Reminder is 0, but one in base
64 is equal to B.
And zero in 64 is equal to A.
So we keep the remainder.
And then they put a carry to the
next position. So this Carry is
1 but in the 64 numbering system
is equal to b.
And now B +
C + a, A is.
0.
Z is 25.
And B is 1, so 1 + 25
becomes 26 + 0 becomes 26.
So now we have to see what's the
digit for 6 in base.
If you go to the look up table,
we can see that is 26 is equal
to small a.
Because it strats from, ABC up
until Z. All capital an after
the capital z it starts with
small a so from the Z +
1 becomes small a 25 plus the
carry one which is B in the
64 base plus zero which is
a in 64.
64 based becomes 26 ,26 in base.
Four is A and then plus.
Added by a means that plus is
26 to 2 + 0 is zero. A is equal to
0 so it becomes 62 + 0 becomes
62 the same or plus.
And then a + 0 is at.
So this is the next number.
And then if you want to increment.
Another time with one unit.
So one is equal to AAAB
in base 64.
So this time.
Is equal to.
0 + 1 becomes one, so b.
a + 0 becomes a.
Plus added by zero becomes plus
a + 0 becomes, so these are
the two next numbers in 64.
So.
Next question.
There's one about is the lab
assignment different from the
lecture assignment? Yes, yes,
actually. Lab assignments are
based on the I mean your
activity for in the labs, and
there is a manual for lab
assignments, so you have to go.
Let me show you again.
My here for the lab assignments.
You have to go to the labs.
Let me let me share my
screen first.
So you have put lab, something
you have to go to the labs.
And here you see the lab
manuals. This is the lab
assignment for the first week,
which is to this week. This is
the manual for that. I mean it
did. It describes what should
you do an etc. And then this
is a sample submission.
And next week you have lab
assignment 200 setup for the
lecture assignment. You have to
go to the lectures.
And then go to that week. For
instance, if we we have
lecture assignment for the second
week, so you have to go to
this. I will enable it and then
you'll find the assignment
there and then you said
basically the lecture
assignments are math proof or
some written. I mean
assignments. The lab
assignments are programming
assignments.
Next there was there was like a
group of questions like so the
lab start today and what what do
we do during the lab?
Oh, during the lab actually you
have to do some programming.
Then if you attend the labs or
lab instructors there, they help
you how to solve the lab
assignments. For instance, the
first lab is installing eclipse,
an programming C or C++ in
eclipse. So they guide you how
to install eclipse. If you have
some problems you can ask them
and then they help you how to
write the lab assignments for
the lab assignment week number
one you have to write a program
to do and.
Or not, on a given input. So if
you can write the program so you
cannot attend the lab if you
cannot and you have some
question, you can attend the
labs and the lab instructor
helps you how to install
eclipse, how to program in C or
C++, and how to write the code
for assignments. So.
If you go to the
discussion board.
And then go to the laboratory.
You can see that lots of the
student posted some questions.
For instance, I cannot access no
machine or there are some issues
at output in the in the eclipse.
So all these issues can be
answered in lab lecture or lab
sections and the lab instructor
can answer all these questions.
Also I will answer your issues
here so the lab sections are for
helping you to do the lab
assignments. Which is
basically programming
assignments.
Any other questions? I think
this might be the last one. It
said there wasn't a lecture
assignment last week, right?
Yes, yes there are no assignment
last week because I wanted to
synchronize the lab and lecture
assignments. So I will start the
lecture assignment .
The same way as the lab
assignments start, so there were
no assignments last week.
Any other questions?
I think that's it.
Cool. Thank you so much and
I will be on my office. So
if you have any other issue
or questions I'm happy to
answer there. All of them
in the office hour. Thank
you all. Have a good day.